[Applause]
KS 107.3 fm ocidental California the
what now show Mondays 11:00 a.m. to 2
p.m. uh live on the telephone from the
United Kingdom we have David Deutsch
good afternoon good evening good evening
uh what is it 7 o'clock 8 o00 where you
are it's just past 7 o'clock yeah all
right excellent uh have you had your
supper not yet all right well maybe we
can uh stimulate your appetite just a
little bit more yes I've just been
playing badminton so um I'm having a
nice rest now yeah how's your game
bad well practice practice MH um thank
you very much for joining us should I
refer to you as Dr Deutsch or Professor
David absolutely uh I'm getting a little
bit of an echo I don't know if you're
hearing any but it's tolerable it's not
bad at all okay could find another line
but yeah I don't want to take the time
to call back I think we're going to make
do here here okay uh are you in Oxford
yes ah Okie do um by way of introduction
uh David Deutch uh fellow of the Royal
Society uh Israeli British physicist at
the University of Oxford I'm reading
from Wikipedia he is a
non non-stipendiary visiting professor
in the department of atomic and Laser
physics at the center for Quantum
computation at the Clarendon laboratory
of the University of Oxford he pioneered
the field this is going to take a moment
he pioneered the field of quantum
computation by being the first person to
formulate a description for a Quantum
touring machine as well as specifying an
algorithm designed to run on a quantum
computer he's also a proponent of the
many worlds interpretation of quantum
mechanics I want to go through this
David hang on with me okay in the Royal
Society of London's announcement of
Deutsch becoming a fellow of the royal
societ Society a couple of years ago the
society described Deutsch's
contributions thus quote David Deutsch
laid the foundations of the quantum
theory of computation and has
subsequently made or participated in
many of the most important advances in
the field including the discovery of the
first Quantum algorithms the theory of
quantum logic gates and Quantum
computational networks the first Quantum
error correction scheme and several
fundamental Quantum universality
results he has set the agenda for
worldwide research efforts in this new
interdisciplinary field made progress in
understanding its philosophical
implications via a variant of the many
universes interpretation and made it
comprehensible to the general public
notably in his book the fabric of
reality and the fabric of reality is
some maybe 14 15 years old now and uh
the new book which is causing quite uh
quite a buzz is called the beginning of
infinity so uh we're very privileged to
have you on the show and welcome and
thank you well thanks for inviting me um
I'm uh a long time I'm a New Yorker and
I've been reading the New York Times for
for 55
years and uh a couple of months ago I
suppose let's see yeah in the book
review uh the New York Times book review
gave uh the beginning of of Infinity uh
subtitled explanations that transform
the world uh a very rare double page
centerfold in the book review section
with the with the headline explaining it
all explaining it all um this is uh
quite uh quite a feather in your cap to
be so
celebrated yes I was very pleased
especially since the reviewer was uh
David Albert with whom I have some
profound disagreements about
more or less all the issues in the book
um but what we have in common though is
is um our sense of what is important
rather than what the answer is and
therefore each of us thinks that the
other one is making really good
contributions but isn't actually right
what is important David uh the the the
um the main issue in the book which from
which all the other the uh themes of the
book flow is what is the difference
between ideas and ways of thinking that
work that can make progress that can get
gain the truth um and those that can't
and this comes up in all sorts of
different um issues uh starting with the
fact that that progress from the point
of view of the human species um as a
whole progress is is very recent and
very rare
for most of human history people would
live their entire life without ever
encountering um an
innovation um whereas now we take it for
granted that that you know iPhone
updates come more often than is
comfortable David I'm going to backtrack
and uh get off the phone and call you
back the echo is uh is a nuisance and
we're going to try again okay I could
give you another number to try well uh
let uh let me try this one again and see
what happens uh I will it'll take a
couple of minutes I'll be right back
with you
y okay we're going to try it again uh
here's a little more
music uh David hi hi uh we'll we'll see
if there any uh if we can pull this
thing off um as I said a minute ago I
wanted to uh I wanted to just uh uh take
it from the top again um I I hardly feel
qual qualified to discuss uh Quantum
anything with you let alone physics or
or or the higher reaches of the kind of
uh Brilliance that you're that you're
completely um that's attributed to you
um if you don't mind uh there's a couple
of things that I want to offer you first
of all uh this is an opportunity for you
to speak to our listeners so I'm
interested uh primarily in what you
might feel is important for us to know
so I invite you to address Us in that
manner okay um there are two there are
two ways to do that one is to to speak
to us to meet us more than halfway and
speak to us as the common women and men
that we are here and then maybe uh later
in the interview uh I would happily
invite you to speak to those of us who
may be familiar with uh with the uh the
rarified uh intelligence that you uh
represent so would would you do us a
favor would you do me a favor and uh and
just make a general statement about
about uh about the nature of our life
here the nature of the world we live in
indeed thank you sir yes so I guess the
elephant in the room is that progress um
that we're so used to now that we we're
we're we're used to um reading about new
technology and new political ideas and
new moral ideas new ways of life all the
time uh you pick up the newspaper and
and you're told that something that was
very familiar is soon going to disappear
or you're told something that was very
familiar is actually wrong and you you
never knew this before and so on this is
what our way of life is about nowadays
rapid
change and although a lot of people are
very cynical about it if you take the
longer term view of of decades at a time
this is definitely for the the better
mhm so uh we have to call it not just
rapid change but rapid progress and the
elephant in the room is that rapid
progress in that sense in the history of
our species has been exceptionally rare
and our civilization is the first one
ever the first one ever on the planet to
sustain rapid progress for more than two
or three generations we've sustained it
for two or three
centuries is our progress uh actually
accelerating uh the the signs are that
it is indeed accelerating if you if you
look at uh the sort of rate of change
I'm talking about the rate of change of
the way of life of of
um uh of everybody not not just things
like the volume of scientific literature
and so on which is going up
exponentially but just just in in terms
of um the number of things you can list
uh on on the fingers of one or two hands
when you say you know I can't imagine
what life used to be like 10 years ago
20 years ago whatever before we had the
the worldwide web or before we had
Google and um and so on um yes I I think
we are now used to a lot of things
happening fast along those lines whereas
for most of human history even say a
century ago
a century ago they also thought that
progress was happening fast but it was
nothing compared with the speed now
right and likely uh we're thinking how
fast it is now and likely we uh
literally cannot imagine what what it's
going to be like in another 10 or 20
years that's exactly right so uh it's
it's going to be unimaginably different
from today and so one one of the themes
so I said that that was the basic theme
of my book uh the the what the
difference between what can bring about
progress and what cannot bring about
progress so one of the things that that
this tells us is that if there is going
to be rapid progress
continuing we cannot predict the future
and that raises some very interesting
and important questions
about what is the rational way to think
about an unknowable future um how can we
plan for an unknowable future and so on
and some of the Common Sense ideas about
what to do in that situation are just
wrong in my opinion for example uh
assume that our best technology of today
is still going to be there 50 years from
now it's still going to be the best 50
years from now um which is sort of
assumed in a lot of planning is just
silly right it's
Preposterous indeed indeed but but then
the interesting question is what can we
do what uh since we don't know the
content of future technology future
ideas even future conceptions of right
and wrong you know things that we think
are things that we thought were fine 50
years ago are considered uh horrible
crimes today things like uh I don't know
beating children or racial
discrimination and so on um and that is
going to accelerate too so what can we
do I think the main thing
to realize is that the the the the same
thing that causes this um Horizon of
predictability is the very thing is the
very thing that is our only possible
defense against it and that is rapid
progress we're we're going to encounter
problems that we cannot predict and the
only way to deal with that that um
Prospect is to make as much progress as
we can as in understanding the world in
a fundamental way because if you have
fundamental
theories then there is a chance that
they will be able to cope with
unfamiliar situations if you merely have
parochial rules of thumb that work for
the moment and in a certain situation
then you're going to be in real trouble
when the unexpected arises right and
we're already doing that so it's it's
not I'm you know I'm not calling for a
radical change in the whole of society I
think our society is already like this
it's it's more that um uh people find it
scary when it is actually the
reverse well it's an absolutely
unprecedented opportunity it is it is
and and we don't you see we we change
things for the better whenever we can
see it's for the better so the
unforeseen problems are going to be of
the form something or other looked as
though it was going to be good but
raised an unforeseen problem and that's
you know that's not too bad it a lot of
times in the past people intentionally
caused horrible things to happen that's
that's not what we're doing in our
civilization um so the the title of the
book the beginning of of infinity is is
actually uh uh an optimistic or optimism
maybe isn't the right word it's actually
a uh
um uh an intuition that we may well be
on on the verge of uh of quite possibly
a golden
age uh I I yes um I think it's more than
an intuition I I think that this follows
from the best knowledge we have about
how knowledge Works um what the
relationship is between theoretical
knowledge on the one hand and Technology
on the other the ability to change the
world and that I do call that optimism
even though it's slightly different from
the conventional meaning of the word
something like expecting the best
outcome I don't necessarily expect the
best outcome it's just that um the best
outcome is possible that is that there
there are no there are no fundamental
barriers to progress right that's the
that's optimism in my sense in other
words to a achieve things that we want
to achieve is just a matter of knowing
how provided we don't want to violate
the laws of
physics um by going faster than light or
something making a perpetual motion
machine provided we don't want to do
that kind of thing we can do anything if
we have the right knowledge and we
already know
fortunately how knowledge is created
basically through the methods of science
and reason right and uh we also need the
right heart don't we yes well um the uh
one of the another of the themes of of
the book that that comes out from this
is is uh is precisely that that
moral ideas and also aesthetic ideas
that I have a whole chapter on uh why
flowers are beautiful objectively
beautiful and uh also moral ideas are
objective must be there must be
objectively such a thing as right and
wrong we we there is no automatic way of
knowing what it is anymore than there's
an automatic way of knowing whether the
the higs boson exists uh we what we have
to do in the case of the higs boson of
scientific um controversies is
conjecture testable theories and then do
experiments to distinguish between them
with moral theories we can't do tests
that you can't test experimentally
whether a given goal that you have is
morally right or morally wrong but what
you can do and what is perfectly
analogous is you can apply rational
criticism you can see whether that
theory meets the um criteria that it is
intended to meet whether it's consistent
with other things whether it's
consistent with facts which we can test
uh and so on and in that way we the the
this is how the moral progress that
we've made already has happened uh so
there is such a thing objectively as
right and wrong objectively beautiful
and ugly just as much as objectively
true and false in Science and
Mathematics yeah you've written uh in
that chapter that uh uh that deep truth
is often beautiful and that
mathematicians and theoretical science
scientists call this form of beauty
Elegance which you say is the beauty in
explanations yes explanations are the
theme that
links um knowledge in different fields
um so that what you just said is an
example of aesthetic knowledge being
linked in a way that we don't yet
understand but which is perfectly uh
obvious when when you're uh
participating in it um that that uh
there's a link between uh
aesthetic knowledge about beauty and
mathematical knowledge which is about
abstractions and also knowledge in
science which is about the laws of
physics so explanations are the link
explanations are statements of what is
there in reality and why and how it
works are we coming to understand who we
are are we are we starting to get some
clarity about human
identity the uh the short answer is yes
yes but but this is something that one
of the least understood things um we
know who we are what we are as animals
that is we we know quite a lot about our
Evolution and we also know quite a lot
about uh how evolution in general takes
place but what how our minds work which
is the distinctive thing about humans
that makes us qualitatively different
from every other currently existing
animal on earth uh is our minds and we
don't know how those work and there are
lots of ideas which claim to to uh know
you know that the field of artificial
intelligence for the last 50 years has
believed that it was on the verge of
creating an artificial one of these
things an artificial mind and it hasn't
yet and in my opinion that is because
there is a a a a very important
outstanding problem
about how creativity works and I I I
again as I say in the book um I have
learned to apply a single Criterion to
all claims by people who claim that they
understand the human mind namely can you
program it can you make an artificial
one by programming what you think is the
explanation of how it works into a
computer and no one at the moment can
and therefore I don't take any such
claims seriously at the moment I of
course I I it's it's um um definitely
the case that such computer programs can
be
written but we just don't know how to do
it
yet
um do you have some sense of what we're
living for other than just uh
participating in the unknown uh
phenomenon of of being here and and
developing and
evolving yes again this has to do with
both moral and aesthetic values um what
we're trying to do even though many
people try to deny this they deny that
they are seeking trying to do what is
right or trying to create what is
actually beautiful and so on but that is
what we're trying to do and uh that is
the
meaning
um religion traditionally thought that
there were the meaning was already known
or had been revealed to humans and that
what our task is is to live up to that
to enact it um my view is the other way
around that that the meaning of life is
something that we are using
creativity
to to discover to build uh the there
isn't a perfectly accurate word for what
we're doing but the that we can't
find the meaning of life in the world
out there nor just by pure thought or by
um uh reference to an authority what we
have to do is form explanations about
what is right and wrong what is better
and worse what's beautiful and and ugly
and hone those theories while also
trying to meet them at any one moment
we will meet them imperfectly just like
scientific theories at any one moment
are only an
imperfect um explanation of what the
physical world is like but through
criticism and
conjecture um and being and seeking the
truth we can eliminate the errors in
what we had previously thought and there
thereby make progress and that is you
know trying to find the meaning of life
trying to create the meaning of life is
the meaning of
life so we we want to model and
articulate
reality yes both moral aesthetic as well
as abstract and physical reality yes
exactly um is the idea of a single
Universe uh quaint is it uh already
anachronistic
um in my opinion yes but I have to give
a warning with this to go along with
this theory that the overwhelming
majority of my colleagues among
fundamental pH physicists who work on
fundamental physics would uh disagree
with me um the clinging to a single
Universe world view and trying to
explain away the uh both the theory and
the experiments of quantum mechanics is
the the majority view now I I think this
is deplorable but I don't want to go
around giving the impression that um my
view is the only one about this quite
the contrary I I think uh perhaps fewer
than 10% of my colleagues would agree
with this but uh I think this is just a
sociological phenomenon something went
badly wrong with the physics Community
round about the
1930s and uh we haven't yet got over it
and it's a bit of a scandal I have to
say it it it is as it is exactly as if
um paleontology the the denial that
quantum mechanics describes parallel
universes is exactly the same logic as
denying that fossils represent Dinosaurs
the fossils are evidence of dinosaurs so
what people will say is okay the quantum
mechanics experiments come out as if the
photon in our universe was being
affected by photons in other universes
and so on but that doesn't mean that
there are other universes because no
one's ever seen one and that's the same
logic as
saying um uh okay so the dinosaurs are
the only known explanation of fossils as
we see them but no one's ever seen a
dinosaur and no one ever will
and therefore it's optional whether you
say those dinosaurs are real or not and
and so the so just as people say that
quantum mechanics is only the study of
what we will see when we do an
experiment is exactly the same as saying
paleontology is only the study of
fossils not the study of what animals
brought about th those particular
patterns in rocks mhm um I'm not saying
that the State of Mind of physicists
when they uh try to avoid the many
universes uh conclusions is the same as
that of creationists but I am saying I'm
afraid that the logic of their
argument um is identical to that of
creationists who say that there are
fossils but no
dinosaurs are you satisfied with the
Precision of
language
um no but that's only because um new
ideas if they're fundamental they often
um make existing language misleading and
imprecise so uh this certainly happens
in in parallel universe theory and in
some of the other fields that that I've
worked in but I don't I think the idea
of having a perfectly precise language
in order perhaps to get rid of of all uh
human disputes and so on I think that's
a chimera there there's there's no way
to do that um what uh we have to do is
be pre as precise as is necessary to
express the explanations that we want to
express the perfect Precision is
impossible and also terminology language
always contains also builtin assumptions
some of which will be wrong and
therefore language contains builtin
false theories um one of the ones that I
described in my first book was was
language
contains uh this false theory that time
flows that that the the present moment
moves from yesterday to today to
tomorrow but of course nothing moves
from yesterday to today to tomorrow
yesterday always remains where it always
was behind today and um so this this
idea of the flow of time which is built
into our very language is just a mistake
and it's one of the things that one has
to unlearn when one deals with time in
physics uh and that's that's a general
thing that that language contains um
assumptions and theories which may be
false do you find existence uh uh
fascinating or and more than that do you
find it worthy of uh an of
ecstasy
um yes now here we come immediately to a
place where language is perhaps um not
precise enough um uh I I think that
because of this Unity of these many
different kinds of truth that I
mentioned physics uh morality Aesthetics
and so on um the the The Pursuit
Of Joy I would say rather than ecstasy
is um it's really the only on the
largest scale it's really the only token
that we have that we're doing the right
thing and yet i' I've immediately got to
contradict what that sounds like it it
sounds like a hedonistic um uh advocacy
of a hedonistic
worldview uh you have to remember that
that again if we'd want try to fit this
into the general scheme of being at the
beginning of Infinity of expecting
unlimited Improvement in the future that
means that we have to be critical of the
criteria that we use to uh be joyful
about something so while uh using it as
a Criterion as a guide we must not use
it as an
authority so it's not that we subord
ordinate everything to Joy or pleasure
or or so on but that we use it as a
guide while being open to changing it so
uh we should be ready to change what we
enjoy to something better um this is by
the way what's one of the things that's
wrong with utilitarianism the idea that
uh that morality consists of maximizing
one's preferences or maximizing the
greatest good of the greatest number uh
it it um it assumes that our preferences
are fixed or or biological or so on and
in fact that that that denies the most
important thing
about human beings namely that we alter
our preferences we can improve them just
as we can improve all our other ideas
preferences are just ideas so um you
know the the the um the stereotype
reputation of utilitarianism is that
your friend asks you um what what um uh
which job which of these two job offers
should I take uh which which of these
two jobs should I want is is really the
question and and you say well choose the
one that you prefer and he says yes well
don't don't be silly um that's what I'm
asking you I'm asking you which one I
should prefer and
utilitarianism cannot describe the
meaning of that exchange but I think
it's perfectly obvious what it means uh
it is possible to be undecided about
what to
prefer uh and this is this is something
that only humans again can do because
animals do have fixed preferences yeah
they can be trained to do one thing or
another but if one animal can be trained
to do it then so can another and there
are things that for each animal there
are things that it is impossible to
train it to do which seem perfectly
obvious and natural to a human to
do I'm curious uh why you chose to turn
away from the word
ecstasy uh because ecstasy to me has a
con connotation of um uh a renunciation
of criticism it it's uh one one is um
one falls into an ecstasy one is one is
uh dominated by ecstasy and and it it is
something supposed to be Primal and
and beneath the level of critical
thought whereas the thing that I'm
aiming for is entirely subject to
critical
[Music]
thought um do you have regard for the
work of uh Thomas Barry and Brian swim
uh I don't know them I'm afraid I see
well they uh among other things they
produced a book called The Universe
story about 20 years ago and uh it had
uh it's kind of like the family album it
kind of uh uh gives us uh uh a a
beautifully um articulated sketch of our
of the history of our universe this
particular Universe um I just thought
you might uh you might be familiar with
it um
uh David uh these days we're witnessing
uh a tremendous social phenomenon around
around so-called spiritual uh ideas and
practices does the word Spirit have any
real
meaning uh rather than ask about the
word I I I would prefer to concentrate
on the phenomenon I I think um the the
this progress that I I referred to at
the beginning which was caused by The
Pursuit Of Truth and good explanations
and and so on has been accompanied from
the
outset by various forms of rebellion
against it um so that um uh but some
some of them are very overt uh and I
think the spiritual Trend that you're
referring to if I understand correctly
what you're referring to is one of the
Rebellion sort of rebellion against
reason it it is saying that there is
something more to the world than true
and false that um perhaps if we feel
that something is true that can make it
true perhaps if we want something to be
true that can make it true or hope it to
be true or hope that it's true uh of
course there is a grain of Truth in that
uh as I said earlier the the uh only the
laws of physics stand between us and and
knowledge stand between us and achieving
what we want but that's not what we mean
here the the the spiritual angle that I
was criticizing is that we can make
things be true just by believing them to
be true or hoping or wishing as you said
now that's that Rebellion I I think is
wholly
false it it's uh a sort of Hangover from
pre rational times but it Al has an
entirely modern um aspect which is that
it is a rebellion uh the the the ancient
spirituals spiritualism and
religiousness and so on was not a
rebellion against reason um the reason
as we know it hadn't really been
invented um but the modern one is and
just for completeness let me say that
that I think an a more dangerous enemy
to reason is not this over rejection of
it uh in spiritualism but the
apparent acceptance or even worship of
it uh the best way I can describe this
is that the the French
Revolution described itself as the
Triumph of
reason and the result was Mass
Slaughter and the including the killing
of of the most prominent scientists in
France and the imposition of uh um
bloodthirsty dictatorship followed by um
uh Napoleon and and War and so on and
all this was done by people who believed
that they were
overthrowing ancient unreason in favor
of reason but actually and and they
called this the
enlightenment um and to me this this is
just another Rebellion this is the um
the enlightenment Rebellion against
reason that but the enlightenment also
had another strand which was um uh
followed more initially followed more in
the English-speaking countries um which
was which was in favor not
of um
establishing immediately a state called
reason uh which would be the ideal State
and which would would uh which would
then not need any further Improvement
but on the contrary to Esta to try to
improve things so that institutions were
able to correct their own errors so this
was a very uh gradualist and
evolutionary approach to unlimited
progress um one of the one of the
paradoxes of the bad kind
of um uh of application of reason is
that even if you were to to succeed in
doing that it would mean that you had
and and achieving your Utopia it would
mean that no further progress was
possible and if no further progress is
possible then what we were saying
earlier is the essence of the of
humanity would no longer be possible
either humans would just be
functionaries in this idealized Utopia
and there'd be no point in being
one and well so but in in practice it it
just led to violence whereas the
um the good side of the
Enlightenment is the thing that is now
the basis of our of of of Western
civilization and has the potential for
unlimited further progress in the future
if we make the right choices if if we
make the wrong choices we could just
destroy it and go back to stasis or
worse just as happened with every
previous attempt at progress in human
history
mhh do you sense any any uh obligation
uh that we're that we have to uh to
succeed um I suppose we do um the the if
if you recognize that you have an
obligation to Future
Generations then um really I don't see
uh any alternative but to say that we
need progress because progress is
simply helping future on the on that
time scale is helping future
Generations um not to suffer not to um
uh be thwarted in their attempts to
improve their lives um and helping them
to be better in whatever ways they turn
out to want to be better which we hope
will be better ways than we currently
think are better so everything can
improve the only alternative which is
sometimes called
sustainability is to assume that um
everything that works
today we we should never do anything
today that isn't going to work
indefinitely and that means if we take
that seriously that means uh that we're
aiming for stasis I know that people who
are in favor of
sustainability don't think of it that
way they think of sustainability as
sustainable
progress but that is um a contradiction
in fact if you if you uh Analyze That in
the light of what progress actually
consists of and what is required to make
progress um unfortunately it is
impossible because progress requires
conject cure and criticism and therefore
it requires errors and if we try
conversely if we try to achieve an error
free state we will also have a progress
free state as my old boss uh John
Wheeler used to say um our whole problem
is to make the mistakes as fast as
possible and he he was he was speaking
about within physics uh trying trying to
improve our knowledge of the laws of
physics the same thing is true of all
knowledge um our whole problem is to
make the mistakes as fast as possible
and
conversely arranging things so that we
don't make any mistakes so that we can't
make any mistakes or that we're we're
we're trying to make a way of life that
doesn't have mistakes is also
necessarily a way of life that can't
make
progress uh you were at one one time
maybe you still are involved in a
project called taking children
seriously uh is that still uh something
that's alive um it's yes it's um um this
is just another application of the same
idea that um uh in in the broader sense
um a lot of ideas that are prevalent
today
are um hangovers of a time of stasis the
the the time of a static society that
preceded uh what we call Western
Civilization there was a gradual change
beginning round about the time of the
Renaissance and those ideas were all
about trying to keep existing knowledge
the same because they thought that all
things worth knowing had already been
said perhaps in holy books uh and
whatever and the the the whole of
society was just a gigantic machine for
for keeping the existing ideas morality
knowledge technology ways of life and of
course religion um the same preventing
change and um if you think about how we
think about education today it's one of
the things that hasn't really caught up
with the
enlightenment um when when we think of
what for example what makes a good
school a good University a good
educational system it's high standards
well high standards
means uh everybody as many people as
possible should meet the standard in
other words they should be as alike as
possible and what's more they should be
alike by the way that was defined by the
previous
generation and really that is the exact
opposite of what we need to make PR
progress and um as a result the values
that are embodied in the educational
system like do as you're told um and and
meet be become standardized and so on uh
are actually in in conflict with the
values of our society in on in the
broader sense so you constantly issues
arise about
uh a conflict between one of the things
that people take for granted uh should
be normal in in a school or in a family
between parent and children on the one
hand and things like freedom of speech
freedom of Association um freedom of
thought and so on on the other hand and
um we need
to
um I would say I was just going to say
emancipate children from compulsory
education but emancipate is the wrong
word because it has a connotation of
politics um just having freedom for
children is is not the same thing as um
it is in for freeing slaves or making
women equal and so on because what
really
counts um with children is not so much
what they're allowed to do or not do as
as how their thinking is to go what what
one
expects a good life to be for um a young
person and at the moment the idea is
that youth is a time during which
one um becomes assimilated to the
standards that by which one is going to
be judged when one is older and uh a a
Freer concept which is closer to the
values of the Enlightenment is to say
that uh youth childhood uh is a time of
creativity and creativity is
unpredictable and that the real thing we
need to try to do is to make the whole
of life like that rather than to amen
shoehorn children and young people into
an existing patter all of us all of us
yes Amen to that uh we have to w W it up
in a minute sir um uh I have one
question and uh and it's this is is at
least for now is the universe or the
Multiverse anything other than blazing
intelligence
itself we can make it so well I don't
know about anything other but but uh it
is it is implied by the idea that
progress is that there are no bounds on
progress
that if we play our cards right if we
want
to we can become the major thing that is
happening in the universe uh both in the
physical sense that is by uh uh leaving
the planet on the spaceships and and
going to to other planets and then to
other star systems and eventually other
galaxies and spreading across the
universe and making all the matter and
energy there increasingly do what we
want it to what gives us joy what we
think is right for it and when they say
we I don't just mean humans and if there
are any extraterrestrials out there then
we and they will be doing this together
um so there there's only one kind of
person possible in the universe so but
not only in that physical sense but also
in the moral sense in the aesthetic
sense that we will be the the thing that
is
deciding what should happen next and
what is
beautiful so um yes I I I don't think
it's quite right to say that uh mind
will be everything but mind can can if
we play our cards right if it plays its
cards right um Can dominate everything
can be the most significant thing about
the
universe and we have every reason to
trust it
uh it's not uh really a matter of trust
because trust again suggests that there
is something immutable about um the
values that will come up so we trusting
them would mean that we're not going to
change them but we are in fact going to
change our values we are doing it very
fast already and we will be doing it
faster I'm very grateful that you uh
came and spoke to us today and uh many
many thank yous well very interesting
questions thanks for having me on the
show uh I hope to speak to you again all
the best okay byebye then David Deutsch
in Oxford Great Britain the author of
the beginning of
infinity explanations that transform the
world also author of A